Server Administration Guide

Server Administration Guide

Table of Contents

Keycloak features and concepts

Features

Basic Keycloak operations

Core concepts and terms

Creating the first administrator

Creating the account on the local host

Creating the account remotely

Configuring realms

Using the Admin Console

The master realm

Creating a realm

Configuring SSL for a realm

Configuring email for a realm

XOAUTH2 email configuration with third-party vendors

Configuring themes

Enabling internationalization

User locale selection

Controlling login options

Enabling forgot password

Enabling Remember Me

ACR to Level of Authentication (LoA) Mapping

Update Email Workflow (UpdateEmail)

Configuring realm keys

Rotating keys

Adding a generated key pair

Rotating keys by extracting a certificate

Adding an existing key pair and certificate

Loading keys from a Java Keystore

Making keys passive

Disabling keys

Compromised keys

Using external storage

Adding a provider

Dealing with provider failures

Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) and Active Directory

Configuring federated LDAP storage

Storage mode

Edit mode

Other configuration options

Connecting to LDAP over SSL

Synchronizing LDAP users to Keycloak

LDAP mappers

Password hashing

Enabling password change after reset

Configuring the connection pool

Troubleshooting

SSSD and FreeIPA Identity Management integration

FreeIPA/IdM server

SSSD and D-Bus

Enabling the SSSD federation provider

Configuring a federated SSSD store

Custom providers

Managing users

Creating users

Managing user attributes

Understanding the Default Configuration

Understanding the User Profile Contexts

Understanding Managed and Unmanaged Attributes

Managing the User Profile

Managing Attributes

Validating Attributes

Defining UI Annotations

Managing Attribute Groups

Using the JSON configuration

Customizing How UIs are Rendered

Enabling Progressive Profiling

Using Internationalized Messages

Defining user credentials

Setting a password for a user

Requesting a user reset a password

Creating an OTP

Allowing users to self-register

Enabling user registration

Registering as a new user

Requiring user to agree to terms and conditions during registration

Defining actions required at login

Setting required actions for one user

Setting required actions for all users

Enabling terms and conditions as a required action

Application initiated actions

Re-authentication during AIA

Parameterized AIA

Available actions

Searching for a user

Default search

Attribute search

Deleting a user

Enabling account deletion by users

Enabling the Delete Account Capability

Giving a user the delete-account role

Deleting your account

Impersonating a user

Enabling reCAPTCHA

Setting up Google reCAPTCHA

Setting up Google reCAPTCHA Enterprise

Personal data collected by Keycloak

Managing user sessions

Administering sessions

Signing out all active sessions

Viewing client sessions

Viewing user sessions

Revoking active sessions

Session and token timeouts

Offline access

Transient sessions

Assigning permissions using roles and groups

Creating a realm role

Client roles

Converting a role to a composite role

Assigning role mappings

Using default roles

Role scope mappings

Groups

Groups compared to roles

Using default groups

Configuring authentication

Password policies

Password policy types

One Time Password (OTP) policies

Time-based or counter-based one time passwords

TOTP configuration options

HOTP configuration options

Authentication flows

Built-in flows

Creating flows

Creating a password-less browser login flow

Using Client Policies to Select an Authentication Flow

Creating a browser login flow with step-up mechanism

Step-up authentication for SAML

Registration or Reset credentials requested by client

User session limits

Script Authenticator

Kerberos

Setup of Kerberos server

Setup and configuration of Keycloak server

Setup and configuration of client machines

Example setups

Credential delegation

Cross-realm trust

Troubleshooting

X.509 client certificate user authentication

Features

Adding X.509 client certificate authentication to browser flows

Configuring X.509 client certificate authentication

Adding X.509 Client Certificate Authentication to a Direct Grant Flow

W3C Web Authentication (WebAuthn)

Setup

Enable WebAuthn authentication in the default browser flow

Authenticate with WebAuthn authenticator

Managing WebAuthn as an administrator

Attestation statement verification

Managing WebAuthn credentials as a user

Registering WebAuthn credentials using AIA

Passwordless WebAuthn together with Two-Factor

LoginLess WebAuthn

Passkeys

Passkey Authentication with Conditional UI or autofill

Passkeys Authentication with Modal UI

Setup

Recovery Codes

Check Recovery Codes required action is enabled

Configure the Recovery Codes required action

Adding Recovery Codes to the browser flow

Creating the Recovery Codes credential

Conditions in conditional flows

Available conditions

Explicitly deny/allow access in conditional flows

2FA conditional workflow examples

Authentication sessions

Authentication in more browser tabs

Integrating identity providers

Brokering overview

Default Identity Provider

General configuration

Social Identity Providers

Bitbucket

Facebook

GitHub

GitLab

Google

Instagram

LinkedIn

Microsoft

OpenShift 4

PayPal

Stack Overflow

Twitter

OpenID Connect v1.0 identity providers

OAuth v2 identity providers

SAML v2.0 Identity Providers

Requesting specific AuthnContexts

SP Descriptor

Send subject in SAML requests

SPIFFE identity providers

Kubernetes identity providers

Client-suggested Identity Provider

Mapping claims and assertions

Available user session data

First login flow

Default first login flow authenticators

Automatically link existing first login flow

Disabling automatic user creation

Detect existing user first login flow

Override existing broker link

Post login flow

Post login flow examples

Requesting additional authentication steps for the dedicated clients

Retrieving external IDP tokens

Identity broker logout

SSO protocols

OpenID Connect

OIDC auth flows

OIDC Logout

Keycloak server OIDC URI endpoints

SAML

SAML bindings

Keycloak Server SAML URI Endpoints

OpenID Connect compared to SAML

Distribution Registry v2 authentication

Docker authentication flow

Keycloak Distribution registry v2 Authentication Server URI Endpoints

Managing access to realm resources

Master realm access control

Global roles

Realm specific roles

Dedicated realm admin consoles

Delegating realm administration using permissions

Understanding the different types of realm administrators

Understanding the Realm Resource Types

Understanding the scopes of access

Enabling admin permissions to a realm

Managing Permissions

Managing Policies

Evaluating Permissions

Accessing a Realm administration console as a Realm Administrator

Understanding some common use cases

Performance considerations

Fine grained admin permissions V1

Managing one specific client

Restrict user role mapping

Full list of permissions

Managing organizations

Enabling organizations in Keycloak

Managing an organization

Creating an organization

Understanding organization domains

Disabling an organization

Deleting an organization

Managing attributes

Managing members

Managed and unmanaged members

Adding an existing realm user as a member

Inviting users

Managing invitations

Onboarding members using an Identity Provider

Removing a member

Viewing organization group memberships

Support for federated members

Managing groups

Creating groups

Adding members to groups

Understanding group paths

Mapping groups to tokens

Managing group attributes

Important distinctions

Deleting groups

Managing identity providers

Linking an identity provider to an organization

Editing a linked identity provider

Unlinking an identity provider from an organization

Authenticating members

Understanding the identity-first login

Configuring existing authentication flows

Configuring how users authenticate

Mapping organization claims

Managing workflows

Understanding workflows

Understanding the workflow definition

Understanding the workflow expression language

Managing workflows

Managing workflows through the Admin Console

Triggering workflows on events

Event functions

Scheduling workflows

Defining conditions

User functions

Defining steps

User steps

Client steps

Understanding immediate steps

Understanding scheduled steps

Understanding the workflows engine

Configuring the scheduled steps execution interval

Configuring the task execution timeout

Performance considerations

Handling failures

Troubleshooting workflows

Enabling workflow debug logging

What to look for in the logs

Useful log categories

Understanding common use cases

User Onboarding

User Offboarding

Tracking user activity and taking actions on inactivity

Managing OpenID Connect and SAML Clients

Managing OpenID Connect clients

Creating an OpenID Connect client

Basic configuration

Advanced configuration

Confidential client credentials

DPoP

Client Secret Rotation

Creating an OIDC Client Secret Rotation Policy

Using a service account

Role mappings in the token

Audience support

Creating a SAML client

Settings tab

Keys tab

Advanced tab

IDP Initiated login

Using an entity descriptor to create a client

Client links

OIDC token and SAML assertion mappings

Priority order

OIDC user session note mappers

Script mapper

Pairwise subject identifier mapper

Using lightweight access token

Generating client adapter config

Client scopes

Protocol

Consent related settings

Include in token scope

Link client scope with the client

Evaluating Client Scopes

Client scopes permissions

Realm default client scopes

Downscoping

Scopes explained

Client Policies

Use-cases

Protocol

Architecture

Configuration

Backward Compatibility

Client Secret Rotation Example

Securing Client URIs

Configuring Keycloak as a Verifiable Credential Issuer

Introduction

What are Verifiable Credentials (VCs)?

What is OID4VCI?

Scope of This Chapter

Prerequisites

Keycloak Instance

Configuring Credential Issuance in Keycloak

Authentication

Configuration Steps

Creating a Realm

Creating a User Account

Key Management Configuration

Configuring Key Providers

Registering Realm Attributes

Define Realm Attributes

Attribute Breakdown

Import Realm Attributes

Time-claim correlation mitigation

Create Client Scopes with Mappers

Define a Client Scope with a Mapper

Attribute Breakdown - ClientScope

Attribute Breakdown - ProtocolMappers

Import the Client Scope

Create the Client

Verify the Configuration

Conclusion

Using a vault to obtain secrets

Key resolvers

Configuring auditing to track events

Auditing user events

Event types

Event listener

Auditing admin events

Mitigating security threats

Host

Admin endpoints and Admin Console

Brute force attacks

Lockout permanently

Lockout temporarily

Lockout permanently after temporary lockout

Secondary Authentication Failures Lockout

Downside of Keycloak brute force detection

Password policies

Read-only user attributes

Validate user attributes

Clickjacking

SSL/HTTPS requirement

CSRF attacks

Unspecific redirect URIs

FAPI compliance

OAuth 2.1 compliance

Compromised access and refresh tokens

Compromised authorization code

Open redirectors

Mitigating Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF)

Secure Client URIs Pattern Executor

Anti-SSRF Pattern Examples

Password database compromised

Limiting scope

Scope availability

Scope visibility

Limit token audience

Limit Authentication Sessions

SQL injection attacks

Account Console

Accessing the Account Console

Configuring ways to sign in

Two-factor authentication with OTP

Two-factor authentication with WebAuthn

Passwordless authentication with WebAuthn

Viewing device activity

Adding an identity provider account

Accessing other applications

Viewing group memberships

Admin CLI

Installing the Admin CLI

Using the Admin CLI

Sensitive Options

Authenticating

Working with alternative configurations

Basic operations and resource URIs

Realm operations

Role operations

Client operations

User operations

Group operations

Identity provider operations

Storage provider operations

Adding mappers

Authentication operations

Server Administration 

Getting Started

Securing applications

Server Developer

Authorization Services

Upgrading

Release Notes

Version 26.6.1

Keycloak features and concepts

Edit this section
Report an issue

Keycloak is a single sign on solution for web apps and RESTful web services. The goal of Keycloak
is to make security simple so that it is easy for application developers to secure the apps and services they have deployed
in their organization. Security features that developers normally have to write for themselves are provided out of the box
and are easily tailorable to the individual requirements of your organization. Keycloak provides customizable
user interfaces for login, registration, administration, and account management. You can also use Keycloak as an
integration platform to hook it into existing LDAP and Active Directory servers. You can also delegate authentication to third
party identity providers like Facebook and Google.

Features

Edit this section
Report an issue

Keycloak provides the following features:

Single Sign-On and Single Sign-Out for browser applications.

OpenID Connect support.

OAuth 2.0 support.

SAML support.

Identity Brokering - Authenticate with external OpenID Connect or SAML Identity Providers.

Social Login - Enable login with Google, GitHub, Facebook, Twitter, and other social networks.

User Federation - Sync users from LDAP and Active Directory servers.

Kerberos bridge - Automatically authenticate users that are logged-in to a Kerberos server.

Admin Console for central management of users, roles, role mappings, clients and configuration.

Account Console that allows users to centrally manage their account.

Theme support - Customize all user facing pages to integrate with your applications and branding.

Flexible Authentication - Authenticate user with various mechanisms including passkey, password or X.509 certificates. Step-up authentication support

Two-factor Authentication - Support for passkey, recovery codes and TOTP/HOTP via Google Authenticator or FreeOTP.

Login flows - optional user self-registration, recover password, verify email, require password update, etc.

Session management - Admins and users themselves can view and manage user sessions.

Token mappers - Map user attributes, roles, etc. how you want into tokens and statements.

Not-before revocation policies per realm, application and user.

CORS support - Client adapters have built-in support for CORS.

Service Provider Interfaces (SPI) - A number of SPIs to enable customizing various aspects of the server. Authentication flows, user federation providers,
protocol mappers and many more.

Supports any platform/language that has an OpenID Connect Relying Party library or SAML 2.0 Service Provider library.

Basic Keycloak operations

Edit this section
Report an issue

Keycloak is a separate server that you manage on your network. Applications are configured to point to and
be secured by this server. Keycloak uses open protocol standards like OpenID Connect
or SAML 2.0 to secure
your applications. Browser applications redirect a user’s browser from the application to the Keycloak authentication
server where they enter their credentials. This redirection is important because users are completely isolated from applications and
applications never see a user’s credentials. Applications instead are given an identity token or assertion that is cryptographically
signed. These tokens can have identity information like username, address, email, and other profile data. They can also
hold permission data so that applications can make authorization decisions. These tokens can also be used to make secure
invocations on REST-based services.

Core concepts and terms

Edit this section
Report an issue

Consider these core concepts and terms before attempting to use Keycloak to secure your web applications and REST services.

users

Users are entities that are able to log into your system. They can have attributes associated with themselves like email,
username, address, phone number, and birthday. They can be assigned group membership and have specific roles assigned to them.

authentication

The process of identifying and validating a user.

authorization

The process of granting access to a user.

credentials

Credentials are pieces of data that Keycloak uses to verify the identity of a user. Some examples are passwords,
one-time-passwords, digital certificates, or even fingerprints.

roles

Roles identify a type or category of user. Admin, user, manager, and employee are all typical roles that may exist
in an organization. Applications often assign access and permissions to specific roles rather than individual users as dealing
with users can be too fine-grained and hard to manage.

user role mapping

A user role mapping defines a mapping between a role and a user. A user can be associated with zero or more roles. This
role mapping information can be encapsulated into tokens and assertions so that applications can decide access permissions on
various resources they manage.

composite roles

A composite role is a role that can be associated with other roles. For example a superuser composite role could be associated with the
sales-admin and order-entry-admin roles. If a user is mapped to the superuser role they also inherit the sales-admin and order-entry-admin roles.

groups

Groups manage groups of users. Attributes can be defined for a group. You can map roles to a group as well. Users that become members of a group
inherit the attributes and role mappings that group defines.

realms

A realm manages a set of users, credentials, roles, and groups. A user belongs to and logs into a realm. Realms are isolated from one another
and can only manage and authenticate the users that they control.

clients

Clients are entities that can request Keycloak to authenticate a user. Most often, clients are applications and services that
want to use Keycloak to secure themselves and provide a single sign-on solution. Clients can also be entities that just want to request
identity information or an access token so that they can securely invoke other services on the network that are secured by Keycloak.

client adapters

Client adapters are plugins that you install into your application environment to be able to communicate and be secured by Keycloak. Keycloak
has a number of adapters for different platforms that you can download. There are also third-party adapters you can get for environments that we don’t cover.

consent

Consent is when you as an admin want a user to give permission to a client before that client can participate in the authentication process.
After a user provides their credentials, Keycloak will pop up a screen identifying the client requesting a login and what identity
information is requested of the user. User can decide whether or not to grant the request.

client scopes

When a client is registered, you must define protocol mappers and role scope mappings for that client. It is often useful to store
a client scope, to make creating new clients easier by sharing some common settings. This is also useful for requesting some
claims or roles to be conditionally based on the value of scope parameter. Keycloak provides the concept of a client scope for this.

client role

Clients can define roles that are specific to them. This is basically a role namespace dedicated to the client.

identity token

A token that provides identity information about the user. Part of the OpenID Connect specificati
... [truncated at 20 000 chars]